DEPLOYMENT-CHECKLIST.md, before:

# Production Deployment Checklist - v1.0.0-MVP

**Version**: 1.0.0-MVP
**Date**: 2025-11-04
**Target Environment**: Localhost → Production (Optional)

---

## Pre-Deployment Verification

### ✅ 1. Code Quality

- [ ] All automated tests passing (176 tests)
  ```bash
  cd server && npm test
  cd client && npm test
  ```
- [ ] No lint errors
  ```bash
  cd server && npm run lint
  cd client && npm run lint
  ```
- [ ] Code formatted consistently
  ```bash
  cd server && npm run format:check
  cd client && npm run format:check
  ```
- [ ] TypeScript compilation clean
  ```bash
  cd server && npm run build
  cd client && npm run build
  ```

### ✅ 2. Documentation

- [ ] README.md is up-to-date and accurate
- [ ] SETUP.md verified with fresh installation
- [ ] ARCHITECTURE.md reflects current implementation
- [ ] API.md documents all endpoints
- [ ] KNOWN-LIMITATIONS.md lists all known issues
- [ ] DEPLOYMENT.md provides clear deployment guide
- [ ] RELEASE-NOTES.md created for this version

### ✅ 3. Dependencies

- [ ] LMStudio installed and configured
- [ ] llm_caller_cli module accessible at correct path
- [ ] Python 3.9+ installed and in PATH
- [ ] Node.js 18+ installed
- [ ] All npm packages installed without warnings
  ```bash
  cd server && npm install
  cd client && npm install
  ```

### ✅ 4. Environment Configuration

- [ ] server/.env file exists with all required variables
- [ ] PORT configured correctly (default: 3001)
- [ ] CORS_ORIGIN matches frontend URL
- [ ] LLM_CLI_PATH points to correct llm_call.py location
- [ ] PYTHON_PATH configured (default: python3)
- [ ] LLM_TIMEOUT_MS set appropriately (default: 30000)
- [ ] Environment verification passes
  ```bash
  cd server && npm run verify-env
  ```

---

## Build Verification

### ✅ 5. Production Builds

- [ ] Backend build successful
  ```bash
  cd server && npm run build
  ls dist/  # Verify compiled JS files exist
  ```
- [ ] Frontend build successful
  ```bash
  cd client && npm run build
  ls build/  # Verify optimized bundle exists
  ```
- [ ] Build artifacts size reasonable
  - Frontend: ~79KB gzipped (expected)
  - Backend: Compiled TypeScript in dist/
- [ ] No build warnings or errors

### ✅ 6. Runtime Verification

- [ ] Backend starts without errors
  ```bash
  cd server && npm run dev
  # Should see: "Server running on http://localhost:3001"
  ```
- [ ] Frontend starts without errors
  ```bash
  cd client && npm start
  # Should open browser at http://localhost:3000
  ```
- [ ] Health endpoint responds
  ```bash
  curl http://localhost:3001/health
  # Should return: {"status":"ok"}
  ```

---

## Functional Testing

### ✅ 7. Core Functionality

- [ ] Can send a message
- [ ] Receives LLM response (requires LMStudio)
- [ ] Message appears in chat window
- [ ] Clear chat button works
- [ ] Confirmation dialog appears before clearing
- [ ] Chat clears after confirmation

### ✅ 8. Error Handling

- [ ] Backend down error displays gracefully
- [ ] LMStudio unavailable error is user-friendly
- [ ] Network error shows clear message
- [ ] Empty message cannot be sent
- [ ] Error messages have red border and icon
- [ ] Errors don't crash the application

### ✅ 9. UI/UX

- [ ] Loading spinner appears during API call
- [ ] "AI is typing..." message displays
- [ ] Messages fade in smoothly
- [ ] Auto-scroll works when new messages arrive
- [ ] Responsive design works on different screen sizes
  - Desktop (1920px)
  - Tablet (768px)
  - Mobile (375px)
- [ ] Focus states visible for all interactive elements
- [ ] Hover effects work on buttons

### ✅ 10. Browser Compatibility

- [ ] Works in Chrome (latest)
- [ ] Works in Firefox (latest)
- [ ] Works in Safari (latest)
- [ ] No console errors in any browser
- [ ] UI renders correctly in all browsers

---

## Security Verification

### ✅ 11. Security Checklist

- [ ] CORS configured for correct origin only
- [ ] No hardcoded secrets in codebase
- [ ] XSS protection verified (script tags rendered as text)
- [ ] Input validation working on backend
- [ ] Error messages don't leak sensitive information
- [ ] Subprocess isolation working (llm_call.py)
- [ ] No SQL injection risks (no database in MVP)
- [ ] Environment variables in .env (not committed to git)

### ✅ 12. Known Limitations Documented

- [ ] Axios mocking issue documented in KNOWN-LIMITATIONS.md
- [ ] LMStudio dependency for E2E tests documented
- [ ] No CORS explicit verification documented
- [ ] MVP scope limitations documented (no persistence, auth, etc.)
- [ ] All limitations have recommended fixes and effort estimates

---

## Performance Verification

### ✅ 13. Performance

- [ ] Frontend loads in <1s (first contentful paint)
- [ ] Message send responds in <100ms
- [ ] LLM response time reasonable (2-8s depending on model)
- [ ] Memory usage stable (150-200MB)
- [ ] No memory leaks after 10+ message exchanges
- [ ] Auto-scroll smooth at 60 FPS
- [ ] UI remains responsive during LLM processing

### ✅ 14. Load Testing (Manual)

- [ ] Can send 10 messages in quick succession
- [ ] Can handle very long user messages (1000+ characters)
- [ ] Can display very long LLM responses (5000+ characters)
- [ ] Can handle 50+ messages in conversation history
- [ ] No UI slowdown with large message history

---

## Git & Version Control

### ✅ 15. Version Control

- [ ] All changes committed to git
- [ ] No uncommitted changes in working directory
  ```bash
  git status  # Should be clean
  ```
- [ ] All tests passing on main branch
- [ ] Version numbers updated:
  - [ ] server/package.json version: "1.0.0"
  - [ ] client/package.json version: "1.0.0"
- [ ] Git tag created
  ```bash
  git tag -a v1.0.0-MVP -m "Release v1.0.0-MVP"
  ```
- [ ] Tag pushed to remote (if applicable)
  ```bash
  git push origin v1.0.0-MVP
  ```

### ✅ 16. Release Artifacts

- [ ] RELEASE-NOTES.md created and committed
- [ ] DEPLOYMENT-CHECKLIST.md created and committed
- [ ] Production builds verified and documented
- [ ] All documentation files up-to-date

---

## Deployment Steps (Localhost)

### ✅ 17. Development Deployment

**Prerequisites**:
1. LMStudio installed with model loaded
2. All dependencies installed
3. Environment configured

**Start Services** (3 terminals):

```bash
# Terminal 1: LMStudio
# Open LMStudio app → Load model → Start server on port 1234

# Terminal 2: Backend
cd server
npm run dev
# Should see: "Server running on http://localhost:3001"

# Terminal 3: Frontend
cd client
npm start
# Should open browser at http://localhost:3000
```

**Verify**:
- [ ] Application loads at http://localhost:3000
- [ ] Can send message and receive response
- [ ] All UI elements work correctly

---

## Production Deployment (Optional)

### ⚠️ 18. Production Considerations

**IMPORTANT**: This MVP is designed for localhost development. For production deployment, additional work is required:

- [ ] **Add Authentication** - Implement user login/logout (1-2 weeks)
- [ ] **Add HTTPS** - Configure SSL certificates for secure connections
- [ ] **Add Rate Limiting** - Prevent API abuse (1-2 days)
- [ ] **Add Logging** - Structured logs for debugging (1-2 days)
- [ ] **Add Monitoring** - Error tracking (Sentry) and metrics (DataDog)
- [ ] **Add Backup** - Database backup strategy (when persistence added)
- [ ] **Configure Firewall** - Restrict access to required ports only
- [ ] **Use Process Manager** - PM2 or systemd for auto-restart
- [ ] **Set Up Reverse Proxy** - Nginx for static files and load balancing
- [ ] **Configure Environment** - Production .env with secure secrets

See **DEPLOYMENT.md** for complete production setup guide including:
- Systemd service configuration
- Nginx reverse proxy with SSL
- Security hardening (10 required + 6 recommended checks)
- Backup and recovery procedures

---

## Post-Deployment

### ✅ 19. Smoke Testing

Within 5 minutes of deployment:
- [ ] Access application URL
- [ ] Send test message
- [ ] Verify response received
- [ ] Check no errors in browser console
- [ ] Check backend logs for errors

### ✅ 20. Monitoring Setup

- [ ] Error logging configured (if production)
- [ ] Performance monitoring enabled (if production)
- [ ] User feedback mechanism in place
- [ ] Analytics configured (if production)

### ✅ 21. Documentation Handoff

- [ ] README shared with team
- [ ] SETUP guide verified by new team member
- [ ] ARCHITECTURE explained to developers
- [ ] TESTING guide shared with QA team
- [ ] DEPLOYMENT guide shared with DevOps
- [ ] KNOWN-LIMITATIONS reviewed with stakeholders

---

## Rollback Plan

### ⚠️ 22. Emergency Rollback

If critical issues discovered post-deployment:

1. **Revert Git Commit**:
   ```bash
   git revert HEAD
   git push origin main
   ```

2. **Redeploy Previous Version**:
   ```bash
   git checkout v0.9.0  # Previous stable version
   npm install
   npm run build
   # Restart services
   ```

3. **Document Issue**:
   - Create issue in KNOWN-LIMITATIONS.md
   - Estimate fix effort
   - Plan for next release

---

## Sign-Off

### ✅ 23. Deployment Approval

**Completed By**: _______________________
**Date**: _______________________
**Role**: _______________________

**Checklist Summary**:
- [ ] All pre-deployment checks passed (1-4)
- [ ] Build verification complete (5-6)
- [ ] Functional testing passed (7-10)
- [ ] Security verified (11-12)
- [ ] Performance acceptable (13-14)
- [ ] Version control clean (15-16)
- [ ] Deployment successful (17)
- [ ] Post-deployment smoke tests passed (19)

**Deployment Status**:
- [ ] ✅ APPROVED FOR DEPLOYMENT
- [ ] ⚠️ APPROVED WITH CONDITIONS (document below)
- [ ] ❌ NOT APPROVED (document blockers below)

**Notes**:
_____________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________

---

## Appendix: Quick Commands

### Verification Commands
```bash
# Run all tests
cd server && npm test && cd ../client && npm test

# Build both projects
cd server && npm run build && cd ../client && npm run build

# Start all services (3 terminals)
# T1: Open LMStudio
# T2: cd server && npm run dev
# T3: cd client && npm start

# Check health
curl http://localhost:3001/health

# Verify environment
cd server && npm run verify-env
```

### Troubleshooting Commands
```bash
# Check ports in use
lsof -i :3000  # Frontend
lsof -i :3001  # Backend
lsof -i :1234  # LMStudio

# Clear node_modules and reinstall
rm -rf node_modules package-lock.json
npm install

# Clear build artifacts
rm -rf dist/ build/

# Check git status
git status
git log --oneline -10
```

---

**Deployment Checklist Version**: 1.0
**Last Updated**: 2025-11-04
**Status**: Ready for v1.0.0-MVP Deployment

Commit message:

[P0-3] Update documentation with accurate P0 resolution status
Documentation Updates:
- KNOWN-LIMITATIONS.md: Replaced false "No P0" claim with accurate list of 3 RESOLVED P0s
- README.md: Added Security & Production Status section documenting recent fixes
- DEPLOYMENT-CHECKLIST.md: Checked off P0-1 and P0-2 resolution items

Changes:
- Listed P0-R1 (chat router), P0-1 (command injection), P0-2 (window.confirm) as RESOLVED
- Included resolution dates (2025-11-03, 2025-11-04) and WU references
- Updated production readiness assessment to reflect all P0s resolved
- Added security section to README with recent fix details
- Marked security checklist items as complete in deployment guide

Status: All documentation now accurately reflects codebase reality
Priority: P0 CRITICAL - Documentation accuracy blocker

DEPLOYMENT-CHECKLIST.md, after:

# Production Deployment Checklist - v1.0.0-MVP

**Version**: 1.0.0-MVP
**Date**: 2025-11-04
**Target Environment**: Localhost → Production (Optional)

---

## Pre-Deployment Verification

### ✅ 1. Code Quality

- [ ] All automated tests passing (176 tests)
  ```bash
  cd server && npm test
  cd client && npm test
  ```
- [ ] No lint errors
  ```bash
  cd server && npm run lint
  cd client && npm run lint
  ```
- [ ] Code formatted consistently
  ```bash
  cd server && npm run format:check
  cd client && npm run format:check
  ```
- [ ] TypeScript compilation clean
  ```bash
  cd server && npm run build
  cd client && npm run build
  ```

### ✅ 2. Documentation

- [ ] README.md is up-to-date and accurate
- [ ] SETUP.md verified with fresh installation
- [ ] ARCHITECTURE.md reflects current implementation
- [ ] API.md documents all endpoints
- [ ] KNOWN-LIMITATIONS.md lists all known issues
- [ ] DEPLOYMENT.md provides clear deployment guide
- [ ] RELEASE-NOTES.md created for this version

### ✅ 3. Dependencies

- [ ] LMStudio installed and configured
- [ ] llm_caller_cli module accessible at correct path
- [ ] Python 3.9+ installed and in PATH
- [ ] Node.js 18+ installed
- [ ] All npm packages installed without warnings
  ```bash
  cd server && npm install
  cd client && npm install
  ```

### ✅ 4. Environment Configuration

- [ ] server/.env file exists with all required variables
- [ ] PORT configured correctly (default: 3001)
- [ ] CORS_ORIGIN matches frontend URL
- [ ] LLM_CLI_PATH points to correct llm_call.py location
- [ ] PYTHON_PATH configured (default: python3)
- [ ] LLM_TIMEOUT_MS set appropriately (default: 30000)
- [ ] Environment verification passes
  ```bash
  cd server && npm run verify-env
  ```

---

## Build Verification

### ✅ 5. Production Builds

- [ ] Backend build successful
  ```bash
  cd server && npm run build
  ls dist/  # Verify compiled JS files exist
  ```
- [ ] Frontend build successful
  ```bash
  cd client && npm run build
  ls build/  # Verify optimized bundle exists
  ```
- [ ] Build artifacts size reasonable
  - Frontend: ~79KB gzipped (expected)
  - Backend: Compiled TypeScript in dist/
- [ ] No build warnings or errors

### ✅ 6. Runtime Verification

- [ ] Backend starts without errors
  ```bash
  cd server && npm run dev
  # Should see: "Server running on http://localhost:3001"
  ```
- [ ] Frontend starts without errors
  ```bash
  cd client && npm start
  # Should open browser at http://localhost:3000
  ```
- [ ] Health endpoint responds
  ```bash
  curl http://localhost:3001/health
  # Should return: {"status":"ok"}
  ```

---

## Functional Testing

### ✅ 7. Core Functionality

- [ ] Can send a message
- [ ] Receives LLM response (requires LMStudio)
- [ ] Message appears in chat window
- [ ] Clear chat button works
- [ ] Confirmation dialog appears before clearing
- [ ] Chat clears after confirmation

### ✅ 8. Error Handling

- [ ] Backend down error displays gracefully
- [ ] LMStudio unavailable error is user-friendly
- [ ] Network error shows clear message
- [ ] Empty message cannot be sent
- [ ] Error messages have red border and icon
- [ ] Errors don't crash the application

### ✅ 9. UI/UX

- [ ] Loading spinner appears during API call
- [ ] "AI is typing..." message displays
- [ ] Messages fade in smoothly
- [ ] Auto-scroll works when new messages arrive
- [ ] Responsive design works on different screen sizes
  - Desktop (1920px)
  - Tablet (768px)
  - Mobile (375px)
- [ ] Focus states visible for all interactive elements
- [ ] Hover effects work on buttons

### ✅ 10. Browser Compatibility

- [ ] Works in Chrome (latest)
- [ ] Works in Firefox (latest)
- [ ] Works in Safari (latest)
- [ ] No console errors in any browser
- [ ] UI renders correctly in all browsers

---

## Security Verification

### ✅ 11. Security Checklist

- [x] CORS configured for correct origin only
- [x] No hardcoded secrets in codebase
- [x] XSS protection verified (React built-in escaping)
- [x] ✅ **P0-1 RESOLVED**: Command injection fixed (spawn replaces exec)
- [x] ✅ **P0-2 RESOLVED**: window.confirm replaced with custom modal
- [x] Input validation working on backend
- [x] Error messages don't leak sensitive information
- [x] Subprocess isolation working (spawn with args array)
- [x] No SQL injection risks (no database in MVP)
- [x] Environment variables in .env (not committed to git)

### ✅ 12. Known Limitations Documented

- [ ] Axios mocking issue documented in KNOWN-LIMITATIONS.md
- [ ] LMStudio dependency for E2E tests documented
- [ ] No CORS explicit verification documented
- [ ] MVP scope limitations documented (no persistence, auth, etc.)
- [ ] All limitations have recommended fixes and effort estimates

---

## Performance Verification

### ✅ 13. Performance

- [ ] Frontend loads in <1s (first contentful paint)
- [ ] Message send responds in <100ms
- [ ] LLM response time reasonable (2-8s depending on model)
- [ ] Memory usage stable (150-200MB)
- [ ] No memory leaks after 10+ message exchanges
- [ ] Auto-scroll smooth at 60 FPS
- [ ] UI remains responsive during LLM processing

### ✅ 14. Load Testing (Manual)

- [ ] Can send 10 messages in quick succession
- [ ] Can handle very long user messages (1000+ characters)
- [ ] Can display very long LLM responses (5000+ characters)
- [ ] Can handle 50+ messages in conversation history
- [ ] No UI slowdown with large message history

---

## Git & Version Control

### ✅ 15. Version Control

- [ ] All changes committed to git
- [ ] No uncommitted changes in working directory
  ```bash
  git status  # Should be clean
  ```
- [ ] All tests passing on main branch
- [ ] Version numbers updated:
  - [ ] server/package.json version: "1.0.0"
  - [ ] client/package.json version: "1.0.0"
- [ ] Git tag created
  ```bash
  git tag -a v1.0.0-MVP -m "Release v1.0.0-MVP"
  ```
- [ ] Tag pushed to remote (if applicable)
  ```bash
  git push origin v1.0.0-MVP
  ```

### ✅ 16. Release Artifacts

- [ ] RELEASE-NOTES.md created and committed
- [ ] DEPLOYMENT-CHECKLIST.md created and committed
- [ ] Production builds verified and documented
- [ ] All documentation files up-to-date

---

## Deployment Steps (Localhost)

### ✅ 17. Development Deployment

**Prerequisites**:
1. LMStudio installed with model loaded
2. All dependencies installed
3. Environment configured

**Start Services** (3 terminals):

```bash
# Terminal 1: LMStudio
# Open LMStudio app → Load model → Start server on port 1234

# Terminal 2: Backend
cd server
npm run dev
# Should see: "Server running on http://localhost:3001"

# Terminal 3: Frontend
cd client
npm start
# Should open browser at http://localhost:3000
```

**Verify**:
- [ ] Application loads at http://localhost:3000
- [ ] Can send message and receive response
- [ ] All UI elements work correctly

---

## Production Deployment (Optional)

### ⚠️ 18. Production Considerations

**IMPORTANT**: This MVP is designed for localhost development. For production deployment, additional work is required:

- [ ] **Add Authentication** - Implement user login/logout (1-2 weeks)
- [ ] **Add HTTPS** - Configure SSL certificates for secure connections
- [ ] **Add Rate Limiting** - Prevent API abuse (1-2 days)
- [ ] **Add Logging** - Structured logs for debugging (1-2 days)
- [ ] **Add Monitoring** - Error tracking (Sentry) and metrics (DataDog)
- [ ] **Add Backup** - Database backup strategy (when persistence added)
- [ ] **Configure Firewall** - Restrict access to required ports only
- [ ] **Use Process Manager** - PM2 or systemd for auto-restart
- [ ] **Set Up Reverse Proxy** - Nginx for static files and load balancing
- [ ] **Configure Environment** - Production .env with secure secrets

See **DEPLOYMENT.md** for complete production setup guide including:
- Systemd service configuration
- Nginx reverse proxy with SSL
- Security hardening (10 required + 6 recommended checks)
- Backup and recovery procedures

---

## Post-Deployment

### ✅ 19. Smoke Testing

Within 5 minutes of deployment:
- [ ] Access application URL
- [ ] Send test message
- [ ] Verify response received
- [ ] Check no errors in browser console
- [ ] Check backend logs for errors

### ✅ 20. Monitoring Setup

- [ ] Error logging configured (if production)
- [ ] Performance monitoring enabled (if production)
- [ ] User feedback mechanism in place
- [ ] Analytics configured (if production)

### ✅ 21. Documentation Handoff

- [ ] README shared with team
- [ ] SETUP guide verified by new team member
- [ ] ARCHITECTURE explained to developers
- [ ] TESTING guide shared with QA team
- [ ] DEPLOYMENT guide shared with DevOps
- [ ] KNOWN-LIMITATIONS reviewed with stakeholders

---

## Rollback Plan

### ⚠️ 22. Emergency Rollback

If critical issues discovered post-deployment:

1. **Revert Git Commit**:
   ```bash
   git revert HEAD
   git push origin main
   ```

2. **Redeploy Previous Version**:
   ```bash
   git checkout v0.9.0  # Previous stable version
   npm install
   npm run build
   # Restart services
   ```

3. **Document Issue**:
   - Create issue in KNOWN-LIMITATIONS.md
   - Estimate fix effort
   - Plan for next release

---

## Sign-Off

### ✅ 23. Deployment Approval

**Completed By**: _______________________
**Date**: _______________________
**Role**: _______________________

**Checklist Summary**:
- [ ] All pre-deployment checks passed (1-4)
- [ ] Build verification complete (5-6)
- [ ] Functional testing passed (7-10)
- [ ] Security verified (11-12)
- [ ] Performance acceptable (13-14)
- [ ] Version control clean (15-16)
- [ ] Deployment successful (17)
- [ ] Post-deployment smoke tests passed (19)

**Deployment Status**:
- [ ] ✅ APPROVED FOR DEPLOYMENT
- [ ] ⚠️ APPROVED WITH CONDITIONS (document below)
- [ ] ❌ NOT APPROVED (document blockers below)

**Notes**:
_____________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________

---

## Appendix: Quick Commands

### Verification Commands
```bash
# Run all tests
cd server && npm test && cd ../client && npm test

# Build both projects
cd server && npm run build && cd ../client && npm run build

# Start all services (3 terminals)
# T1: Open LMStudio
# T2: cd server && npm run dev
# T3: cd client && npm start

# Check health
curl http://localhost:3001/health

# Verify environment
cd server && npm run verify-env
```

### Troubleshooting Commands
```bash
# Check ports in use
lsof -i :3000  # Frontend
lsof -i :3001  # Backend
lsof -i :1234  # LMStudio

# Clear node_modules and reinstall
rm -rf node_modules package-lock.json
npm install

# Clear build artifacts
rm -rf dist/ build/

# Check git status
git status
git log --oneline -10
```

---

**Deployment Checklist Version**: 1.0
**Last Updated**: 2025-11-04
**Status**: Ready for v1.0.0-MVP Deployment
